from Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hansel minutes, a weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number two 80
recorded live Thursday, August 18th, 2011. Support
for Hanselman it's provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forums and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with hashing Wong
from Microsoft research Asia about
Trinity. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
today I am Skyped in
with hi Shing Wong from
Microsoft research Asia calling in
all the way from, from
China right now. Yes. Fantastic.
Thank you for taking the
time to, to chat with
me. I wanted to talk
to you about your project
called Trinity, and you do
a lot of work in,
in Microsoft research and you've
got a number of projects.
You've got Trinity one called
web Q and probates, but
Trinity is a data structure
that thinks about things in
terms of a graph. It
gives me some background on
what Trinity is. Well, Trinity
is actually two projects. Trinity
first is a graph database,
a graph database, which handles
graph very, very large graph
structures and the support online
quarter processing. It's just like
a database which answers quarries
posts by the users. And
on the other hand, Trinity
is also a graph computation
platform for offline large analytics.
So if you want to
do a very, very large
jobs graph data, and it's
just like what you would
to do for text data
or other kinds of data
using, for example, map, reduce
a mechanism. You can use
Trinity to process very large
data in an offline manner.
Okay. So for a developer
who might be listening, who
is familiar with object, relational
data or document databases like
Mongo, what is a graph
database? The graph database is
special in the sense that,
you know, it makes the
graphics proration much easier than
traditional database. So you can
use traditional database, for example,
relational database to, to, to
support graph data. But then
you'll run into a very,
very big problem, which is
a graphics proration will correspond
to join operations on the,
on the, on the data.
And the joint is a
very, very expensive operation. And
the usually for graph data,
you would like to explore
the graph, you know, freely,
and then each Explorer. Every
step you want to explore
will correspond to our joint
operation. So relational database pattern
today cannot handle that. And
the current other no sequel
approach, including for example, how
to pan the other key
value pad stores. They, they
won't be able to do
that as well because they
cannot handle that many joins
when they want to process
the quarters in an online
fashion. So a graph database
is just special. I mean,
it supports online graphics, proration
without using joins. That's the
most important thing to know
about the graph database. Okay.
So let me think if
I understand this correctly, because
I do not have a
PhD and I'm not sure
how many of our listeners
do. I know that when
I've given interview questions before
I've asked junior engineers to
say, can you express a
tree structure in an object
relational database? And often very
beginner people will make multiple
tables. And then a more
advanced person will make a
tree structure. That's a single
self referential table. And then
the tree structure becomes extremely
complex as the joins to
the table itself, kind of
start to Recurse and it
becomes pretty hairy to make
these kind of infinitely deep
self referential tables. Is that
what you're describing to, to
the trouble in creating a
graph in an object relational
manner? Yes. So imagine you
want to, for example, represent
a tree or a graph
using, you know, multiple tables
or a single table with
Def referencing pointers. So basically
what you are doing is
that you are using keys
to a reference, for example,
the neighbors of a particular
node, or the child nodes
have a pattern, know that
you a tree structure. So
you order to find your
child knows child knows all
your neighbors in a graph,
you basically need to search
through those keys, right? You
need to use an index
structure to help you to
find those keys immediate, right?
And they will retrieve those
red cards from the database,
from the table. And then
you find that your neighbors
all your channels. So you
need to go through this
process. So this is going
to be very, very slow
because basically you are, you
are accessing the index and
you are doing a joint
operation. So by doing a
joint operation, I mean the,
those values are not correct
connected the directory, you need
to go through the index.
So across database can be
defined as, you know, it
can find its neighbors or
its channels without using the
index. If you, if a
database system can do that,
then we can call it
a native graph database system.
Otherwise it's just, you know,
using, for example, multiple tables
or relational database to simulate
a graph database. I see.
So would it be fair
to say that often people
have data that is graph
in shape and then they
use the database that they're
the most comfortable with and
begin to run into trouble.
And this is kind of
a, a specific kind of
database for a specific kind
of data. Yes. So of
course, a lot of transaction
data, they are not really
in the, you know, in
the form of a graph,
but you know, more and
more appropriate applications right now,
they are working on very
complex data. And this kind
of data is, you know,
can be nice to be
represented by graphs because graph
has have a lot of
flexibility, flexibility in representing those
kinds of structures. And just
like you said, people will
naturally use a traditional, you
know, data management systems, key
Beto stalls, or relational database
to support these kinds of
new applications. And whenever the
data gets larger and the,
the operations get more complex,
they will run into problems
where, you know, response time
is just not the response
time is just too long
for the online processing. And
if I were to create
a naive in memory graph
structure myself, and maybe I
said, I'm going to have
a database of a couple
of gigabytes and in memory,
and I'll make just a
big, giant bunch of C
sharp objects. What kinds of
issues would I run into
with a naive implementation that
would be solved by a
formal implementation like Trinity? So
basically first of all, you
would need the data structure
to, to, to be stored
in memory because typically the
graph data does not have
locality, which means you cannot
really use, you know, sequential
access to get your information.
Usually, you know, your nodes,
that the neighbors of a
particular node, that they are
all over the place. So
you would like all those
kinds of information residing the
memory, you know, main memory
you said on the disc,
right? So if you only
have a small graph, then
you can do that. Using
all kinds of, you know,
the runtime structures to manage
your, your graph. That that
is fine, but usually we
need to handle very, very
large graphs, so many applications,
they need to handle very
large graphs, like a, you
know, a social network or,
you know, bioinformatics, you need
to handle the gene sequence
of our human being and
the, those kinds of data.
You cannot use a single
machine to support it because
it's just, the memory is
not that right. And then
one approach actually used by
a lot of, you know,
kind of an application is
that, you know, they are
buying a very, very powerful
machine, which can have up
to say one terabyte of
memory. So this is sort
of the, the, you know,
the approach people are taking
right now, but of course
those machines are very costly
and it's, it's, it still
has the scalability problem because
data is getting larger and
larger. So that's the major,
major challenge. And for example,
if you imagine a larger
social network like Facebook, right?
So Facebook has probably close
to 1 billion, let's say 800 million
users. And for each year
on average, you will have
like 150 friends. So for
such a graph, we are
talking about over a one
terabytes of information just to,
you know, represent it's the
graph topology. Okay. And nothing.
I was just a graph
topology. So you'll probably cannot
use a single machine to
do that. And if you
can, a single machine probably
does not have that much
parallel capability to support so
many concurrent online operations. So
you want to scale out
that system into, for example,
15 machines or 200 machines
or things like that. And
that is actually what we
are doing. We are providing
this scalability through class tiles
when, you know, maybe hundreds
or even thousands of machines
to support applications at the
same time, many concurrent operations
at the same time. So,
and the, in this way,
of course we can support
very, very large graph. So
we can support, for example,
the entire web graph, which
will take probably 300 to
500 machines. And for the
user, we provide a very
nice interface. So the user,
it seems to the user
that everything is  of
a single machine. So he
does not have to worry
about where to find its
neighbors or, you know, how
the graph is distributed. So
many machines on the cluster.
So that's what Trinity is
doing. So to understand, you
just said the entire web
graph, like you're talking, like
represent a representation of the
web and all of its
interlinking nodes feeling as if
it is in memory and
available to you, right? Like,
like, like Google or being
it's just there and it's
instantaneously available. Right. Right. So,
but I'm only talking about
the topology of the graph.
So I'm only talking about,
for example, a webpage, it
has on average, maybe 50
links to other, other webpage.
I'm only, you know, storing
the, the nodes, which is
basically a UIL. And also
it's all going links in
this, you know, Trinity's memory
structure, but the content of
a particular webpage is not
extra study memory. That's called
in a database. So only
the typology of the graph
is seen by members. Right.
And that's why I think
that the social networking example
is such a good one
on your, on your research
site, you give the example
that a person on average
has 120 friends in Facebook.
So then if you want
to search me, my friends
and my friends, friends, a
three hop search, while that
seems quite easy, you know,
it's easy to say, you're
looking at 120 plus 120
squared plus 120 cubed. That
would be quite an amazing
SQL query and no small
feat to represent in a,
in a traditional object relational
database. And you're able to
do that in just milliseconds,
Right? So this is extra,
very, very important operation on
a social network graph. So
for example, if someone's such
such or something on being
on Google, and you mean
being an, a Google has
the social networking information, and
then, you know, the search
and you would like to
use the information of your
friends, your friends, friends, and
friends, friends, friends, to sort
of provide relevance cruise to,
to the, to the search.
So this operation has to
be done in a very,
very small amount of time
so that the search engine
will, can take that into
consideration in, you know, providing
answers to the user. So
currently Trinity can do that
as you mean, the data
is in, you know, same
distribution as the Facebook data.
So Trinity can do this
three hops search within a
hundred milliseconds. And if you
use I'll keep at Opez
or any other approach, I
think the time is actually
at least a hundred times,
or even more than what
we can do on Trinity.
Hi, this is Scott coming
to you from another place
in time. Are you using
agile practices to manage your
software development? There's lots of
tools in the market that
manage the steps of a
project, but most of them
focus on individual roles, get
ready for a solution that
caters for the success of
the whole team. Guys at
Tellerik introduced team pulse. It's
an agile project management tool.
That'll help you gather ideas,
estimate plan, track progress in
a common workspace. Finally, companies,
regardless of their size can
use a lightweight and convenient
tool that makes all the
stakeholders work as a United
team. Even if they're in
different countries by combining intuitive
user interface and the power
server light team poles removes
the roadblocks that you typically
face and applying agile in
an effective manner, no more
lost data, no disparate systems,
no lack of critical analytics
regarding the health and philosophy
project. See if yourself get
a free copy for five
users in one project at
tellerik.com/team pulse. And please do
thank tolerant for supporting Hansel
minutes on their Facebook fan
page, facebook.com/t L E R
I K Keller. We do
appreciate it. They wouldn't be
a Hansel minutes if there
wasn't, Tellerik helping us. Now,
a lot of times people
accused Microsoft of, of reinventing
the wheel, although less. So
with Microsoft research, sometimes Microsoft
people say, why don't you
use this open source project?
Or why don't you use
that open source project? I
know that there are other
graph databases like Neo for
J and Google has a
pre, is it pre goal
or pre jail prideful prideful.
So there are other large
scale graph systems out there.
What's what is unique about,
about Trinity visa VI? The
other examples? Yeah, so like
I mentioned, the Trinity is
both sides, a online quarter
processing system and also an
offline, you know, a batch
processing or analytics system. So
in this sense, you can
think of Trinity as a
combination of  and the
project. So prejudi is for
offline quarter processing and UJ
is for online quarter processing,
but Trinity can provide both
capabilities using a single platform.
So that's basically the major
difference. And, and also there's
another thing which is about
the scalability. So we actually
have a compared with you
for Jay when we started
this project and new Fuji
is, is because, I mean,
they have a lot of
versions and we have tried
a few of them and
it seems to me, they
are, first of all, this
credit isn't and on the
second of all, they are
not really very easy to
distribute among a set of
plasters. I'm a set on
machines in a cluster. So
mainly people are using new
Fuji for our smaller graph
applications that can be hosted
in one machine, but new
footage, it does provide a
very, very nice user interface
and a programming interface to
support a user application. It's
just the scalability that we
are trying to improve over
new forgings, that aspect. I
see. I see. And I
know that the way that
you currently access the data
that is inside of Trinity
is with a sharp API
and most of the samples
around a synchrony use that
API along with the task
parallel library, that.net uses for
things like parallel for each.
So it seems like you
get some, some free multithreaded
newness with the parallel libraries.
Do you do additional things
within your own libraries to
utilize the processors as efficiently
as possible? Oh yes. We
actually did a lot of
low level, you know, hacking
into, in order to support
more parallel, you know, in
order to have more parallel
capabilities, but, you know, latest
release, we actually wrap everything,
all those, you know, parallel
computing capabilities, we'll wrap it
into the API APIs. So
the user actually does not
have to deal with, you
know, this express it, they
deal with those parallel constructs.
He can just submit it.
His Quora is as if
we are just running on
a single machine with a
single thread and the system
will automatically take care of
that. And, you know, parallel
a parallel rise. It's a
computation. Interesting. So the data
could be across one machine
or hundreds and hundreds of
machines. It could be across
400 processors or 400 times
24 processes. And they don't
have to think about it
it's as if they're dealing
with an in-memory structure themselves.
Yes, exactly. Well, that's a,
that's a very comfortable, comfortable
interface. That's that's that seems
very pleasant. Is it always
going to be C sharp
though? Yes. Currently we only
have, we only, we only
provide a CCRPI interface, but
of course, I mean the
future, we can look into
possibilities of providing another kind
of another interface, like for
as a, as a, as
a programming languages and other
interface. Yeah. What about a
DSL? What about a domain
specific language or query language?
Is there a standard around
graph databases as there is
around object relational days? That's
a very good question. Actually,
we don't anything like that
right now. Although we have
a side project, which is,
you know, using Trinity as
a platform and we are
building now RDF data store,
uptown Trinity. And for that
project, we have the traditional
sparkle as a query language
to query the, the RDF
data. But of course, I
mean, sparkle is highly limited.
They express expressive power. Sparkle
is either eliminated it's okay
for various standard RDF chorus,
but a lot of RAF
operations cannot be expressed using
sparkles. But at this moment,
we actually don't have a
domain specific language for quarrying
graph data. And, and it
is actually one of our
research focus and the were
thinking about designing more flexible
Cory press form programming platform
for, for graph data. But
on the other hand, we
do have programming module, which
is close to project implemented
in Google. So for example,
the users will, are just
to write a very, very
simple script for specifying what
kind of things and single
node will do in each
round of computation. Like, you
know, it will accept some
messages from its neighbors and
perform some action science messages
and then send out messages
to its neighbors. So the
user will just provide a
script to describe this kind
of actions and the system
would take care of their
parallel execution. So this is
how the offline analytics is
being implemented. Trinity, of course,
this is just the one
scenario and the other scenario,
for example, we also provide
breathless such and as we,
you know, going to every
node I don't in the
breastfed search and the, and
then we will execute a
script specified by the user
on each node. That's another
programming model. Do, do you
see graph databases being something
that the average person's going
to know about? Like, I,
I wouldn't have said five
years ago or 10 years
ago that there would be
much interest in, in document
databases, but they seem to
have really come of age.
The last few years we've
got object relational databases. There
were in fact, a lot
of object oriented databases over
the last 20 years. Although
I don't think they've necessarily
broken into the mainstream is,
is graph data something that
will be kind of obscure
and on the, on the
edge, or do you think
it'll be something that the
average programmer will be using
in, in five or 10
years? Think there's a Possibility
that the graph is going
to be adopted as a
major, even most important data
structuring our future applications. So
if you think about it,
I mean, the data is
getting more and more complex.
And if the data, the
complexity of data is, you
know, it's very limited and
the size of the data
is also limited. Then we
can comfortably use a relational
database like SQL server to
provide, you know, support for
these kinds of applications. But
the reality is beta is
getting more and more complex
in almost every domain in
search in, in, in scientific
computing, for example, bioinformatics and
the UN you know, social
networks and everything. Data is
getting more in a more
complex and you can use,
you know, tables to represent
those data and hope you
will have, you know, model
the data very, very nicely.
And on the other hand,
of course, the size of
the data is getting bigger
and bigger. So this is
extra opens up a huge
space, which traditional database cannot
solve because they are only
good for small data. And,
you know, not that complex
data and the graph data
will be, you know, a
very important player in this
better, better, big space. A
lot of applications will rely
on graph data and the,
we actually have got a
risk sensitive, many minute requests
the, about, you know, what
Trinity can do for, you
know, some specific applications in
gain domain in scientific computing,
bio applications and things like
that. So I can't foresee
many, many interesting applications that
will require a very, very
flexible system that can support
graph data. What do you
think about some of the
newer graph data? I wouldn't
say necessarily formal databases, but
implementations of graph like databases
using distributed memory structures, like
for example, a Reddis graph
and some naive implementations of
a social graph using Reddis
flock DB, what Twitter used
for, for their graph database.
As do you think that
these are, you know, fully
fledged graph databases that could
compete, or these are, are
these just naive implementations over
a standard distributed in memory
data structure? I think they
can support certain kinds of
graph operations, but definitely not
all range of graph operations.
So for example, many social
networks, including Facebook, really you,
the users does not have
the power to actually go
through the huge social network
to find information of his
neighbors and the neighbors, neighbors,
and so on and so
forth. What social network, what
Facebook provides on their website
is basically when I use
a logging, it provides information
about, you know, his friends,
his direct friends. So there's
really just a one step
multiple hops on this huge
graph. So if this is
the case, then Kibera, pear
is done very in a
very nice solution. So the
key value pairs will provide
the information of four. You
can think of it as
providing information of it for
its director neighbors, but as
graph operations get more complex.
And the, you know, some
applications usually, you know, analytics
applications that require exploring this
graph database, exploring this huge
graphs around those passes and,
you know, a very large
scale, then those key Vero
pesto will not, you know,
function with better wealth. So
because fundamentally, they still require
a lot of joins, a
lot of index to, for
the, for, for exploration for,
for going from one note
to the other notes. So
that's the fundamental problem with
those kinds of approach. And
then in conclusion, where do
you see your project going?
Is it always the goal
of a researcher to get
a project to become a
product, or is it simply
your goal to, to expand
the knowledge in the space
and leave it up to
the product people to figure
out if they'll sell it
or not? Oh, so, well,
of course we are still
a research prototype, but we
are actually working with a
few product teams within Microsoft
to support their applications. So
for example, we have within
Microsoft. So we dealing with
the web graph where dealing
with the, you know, the,
the search, the search log
end of the graph and
were dealing with the social
graph. So we are using
well working with the product
team to use Trinity to
support those kinds of applications.
And as our, you know,
our vision is to provide
a general purpose graph computation
platform. So using these applications
where basically trying to see
what is the most, what
is the priority for improving
our system? And then eventually
we try, we would like
to provide this system, you
know, as a general purpose
system for a new kind
of data, which is the
graph data, Actually one last
question, just to get a
sense size. So the, so
the listeners who are going
to go off and research
this themselves and learn more
about your stuff can understand.
I know that as of
a mid, mid 2010 Twitters
graph data called flock DB
had about 13, 13 billion edges,
and they were doing traffic
of about 20,000, writes a
second, and 100,000 reads a
second. So about 13 billion edges.
And I'm sure they've increased
since that. Do you have
a sense of how big
Trinity can get? So, you
know, we haven't tried well,
we're still working with the
product team to try, you
know, to, to use Chinetti
for the web graph. So
we're still skewing the process
of it, but certain billing
edge is actually not that
big. So, because for example,
we are dealing with the
web graph, which has, for
example, 200 billion nodes. And for
each node is basically a
webpage and each node on
average, we'll have 42 50
ads. So if you times
the two together, then it
is much bigger than a
social graph. So basically web
graph is still the largest
graph on the earth. I
mean, may, may the graph
on the earth it's much,
much larger than the social
graph. So we are trying
to use Trinity to support
that. Wow, that's really, that's
really comforting to know that
you can think about edges
in the terms of billions
and billions and not think
of it as being too
large, that, that speaks really
well for the work that
you guys are doing well,
thanks so much for chatting
with me today. I really
appreciate it. And, you know,
giving people outside the research
community, an opportunity to learn
more about what you're doing
in, in Microsoft research. Thanks
for having me. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes, big thanks to high
Shang Wong and the folks
at Microsoft research Asia, we
will see you again next
week. .